docs: update for v2 usage (#1023)
unjs/h3: docs/1.guide/5.routing.md

---
icon: solar:route-linear
---

## Registering Routes

H3 app instance has a built in router system to register routes matching patterns with parameter or specific HTTP method.

::tip
Router is powered by [🌳 rou3](https://github.com/unjs/rou3), an ultra fast and tiny route matcher engine.
::

> In the example below, we register a route requests to the `/hello` endpoint with HTTP GET method:

Reviewer: The part "we register a route requests to ..." would need some more words for collocation (between "route" and "requests"), I guess.

```js
app.all("/hello", (event) => `This is a ${event.req.method} request!`);
```

### Route Params

You can define parameters in your routes using `:` prefix:

```js
app.get("/hello/:name", (event) => {
  return `Hello ${event.context.params.name}!`;
});
```

In this example, the `name` parameter will be available in the `event.context.params` object.

If you send a request to `/hello/world`, the event handler will respond `Hello world!`.

Instead of named params, you can use `*` for unnamed and **optional** params:

```js
app.get("/hello/*", (event) => `Hello!`);
```

### Catch-all param

Adding `/hello/:name` route will match `/hello/world` or `/hello/123`. But it will not match `/hello/foo/bar`.

If you need to match multiple levels of sub routes, you can use `**` prefix:

```js
app.get("/hello/**", (event) => `Hello ${event.context.params._}!`);
```

This will match `/hello`, `/hello/world`, `/hello/123`, `/hello/world/123`, etc.

> [!NOTE]
> Param `_` will store the full wildcard content as a single string.

## Middleware

You can register [event handlers](/guide/event-handler) to app instance using the `app.use`:

```js
app.use("/hello", () => "Hello world!");
```

> This will register the event handler to the app instance and will be called for every request starting with the prefix `/hello`. This means that the event handler will be called for `/hello`, `/hello/world`, `/hello/123`, etc.

Reviewer: If I'm correct, what will be called is the event handler, won't it?
Grammatically the subject is "This" (calling `app.use`) in this sentence.

```suggestion
This will register the event handler to the app instance, and it will be called for every request starting with the prefix `/hello` (i.e. `/hello`, `/hello/world`, `/hello/123`, etc.).
```

> You can define multiple event handlers for the same route. h3 will try to to call them one by one in order of registration until one of them returns a response. This is called `stack runner`.

Reviewer: nipick: typo

```suggestion
You can define multiple event handlers for the same route. h3 will try to call them one by one in order of registration until one of them returns a response. This is called `stack runner`.
```

> You can define multiple event handlers for the same route. h3 will try to to call them one by one in order of registration until one of them returns a response. This is called `stack runner`.

Reviewer: question: 

by the way, what does `stack runner` actually mean?
Is it an array of event handlers that is stacked, or is it the h3 instance (as what calls event handlers) where multiple event handlers are registered to a route?

Author: stack is basically the array of global middleware. h3 v1 was only based on stack + addon router, in v2 we only use it for global middleware.

Author: removed the stack part

```js
app.use("/", () => "First");
app.use("/", () => "Second");
```

In this example, the first event handler will be called for every request starting with `/hello` and the second one will never be called.

However, if you do not return a response from the first event handler, the second one will be called. This is useful to have a _middleware_ pattern.

```js
app.use("/", () => {
  console.log("First");
  // No response returned
});
app.use("/", () => "Second");
```

If all handlers get called and no response is returned, h3 will end the request with 404 status response.

> > [!NOTE]
> > Using an empty `return` or `return undefined` make a [`404 Not Found`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/404) status response.
> > Also using `return null` will make a [`204 No Content`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/204) status response.

Reviewer: nitpick: fix typo and suggestion

```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> Using an empty `return` or `return undefined` makes a [`404 Not Found`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/404) status response.
> Also using `return null` makes a [`204 No Content`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/204) status response.
```

> > [!TIP]
> > Use `return {}` or `return ""` or `return true` to make an explicit response.

Reviewer: nitpick: suggestion

```suggestion
> [!TIP]
> Use `return {}`, `return ""`, or `return true` to make an explicit response.
```
